ls-list the files and directoriesin the current directory.
cd-change the current directory.
mkdir-create new directory
rmdir-remove directory
pwd-print the current working directory.
cp-copy files or directory
[cp source file destination folder]
mv-move or rename files or directories.
[mv source file destination folder]
rm-remove files or directory.
touch-create a new empty file or update te timestamp of an existing file.
cat-concatenate and display files.
man-manual for a command.
htop-an interactive process viewer and system monitor.
chmod-change the permission of a file or directory.
Owner			Group			Public
Read(4)			Read(4)			Read(4)
Write(6)		Write(6)		Write(6)
Execute(7)		Execute(7)		Execute(7)
chown-change the owner of a file or directory.
chown new_owner example.txt
tar-create or extract compressed archive files
gzip-compress files
[gzip file.txt]
gunzip-decompress compressed files.
ssh-connect to a remote server securely.
scp-securely copy files between systems.
ping-test network connectivity.
ifconfig-display or configure network interfaces.
netstat-display network connection information.
route-view of configure network routing tables
top-display system resources usage and processes.
ps-Display inforamtion about running processes.
kill-terminate the processes.
systemctl-control system services and settings.
[systemctl start nginx]
[systemctl status  nginx]
[systemctl stop  nginx]
service-countrol sytem services.
useradd-add a new user to the system.
passwd-change the password for a user.
userdel-delete a user from the system.
su-switch user to become another user.
sudo-excute a command as another user or with elevated privileges.
uptime-display disk space usage.
df-display disk space usage.
du-display disk usage by file or directory.
mount-munt the file system.
unmount-unmount a file system.
date-dislay or set the system date and time.
whoami-display the current user name.
which-locate a program or command in the system path.
finger-displays all the information about a user.
uname-display sytem information.
history-display a list of previouly excuted commands.
echo-display text or variables to the console.
tee-redirect output to both a file and the console.
locate-locate any file on the sytem.
sort-sort lines of text 
uniq-remove duplicate lines from a file or input.
head/tail-display the first/last few lines of a file or input.
